The field of cosmic ray physics is a century old and an exciting
area of research.  When cosmic ray particles enter our atmosphere they
collide with air molecules creating new high-energy particles.
These particles participate in further collisions and the entire process
is known as an air shower.  Much is still unknown about the origin of the
high-energy particles.

This thesis has been carried out as part of the HiSPARC science and
outreach project.  It focuses on the reconstruction of the direction of an
extensive air shower using a station containing three 0.5 m^2 scintillator
detectors in a 10 m triangle.  This yields information on the origin of
the cosmic rays.  First, a method for reconstructing the shower direction
is developed using a direct calculation.  The method is based on the
observation that a slanted air shower will arrive at separate detectors at
different times.  The thickness of the shower front, the geometry of the
detectors, and other experimental effects result in measurement
uncertainties of the arrival times.  These introduce an uncertainty in the
direction of the air shower.  Using error propagation, equations are
derived for calculating this uncertainty.

The methods developed in this thesis have been verified first by
simulations.  Subsequently, data was analyzed from a station located
inside the KASCADE air shower array in Karlsruhe, Germany.  The 200 × 200
m KASCADE experiment provided us with an independent measurement of the
direction of the air showers.  The accuracy of the HiSPARC station has
been determined to be 8.6° for proton showers arriving at an angle
of 22.5°.  Given the small size and low cost of a single HiSPARC
station, the results are very good.

Reconstructing the direction of an air shower by means of multiple
stations has also been investigated.  Using three stations with distances
of 120 - 150 m an accuracy of only 1.5° can be accomplished.

The goals of HiSPARC are two-fold.  On the one hand, it is a traditional
research group comprising research staff, graduate and undergraduate
students.  On the other hand, the experiment enables high-school students
to participate in scientific research.
